Kia ora.
Good
afternoon. Kia ora. Kahurangi Carter, list MP for the Greens based
in Christchurch.
Fantastic. Good afternoon.
All right. Okay. Thanks, Mr. Hall.
So, um, we've got, uh, 10 minutes. You can take your, um,
papers, your very informative and well-researched and well-prepared
papers as, as read. However, no doubt you'll, uh, take us through.
Just a reminder with, uh, select committees, obviously, um,
criticism of judges, um, is something that, uh,
is... is... goes against our standing orders here.
So just a rem- But I'm sure I don't need to remind you of that.
It was the respectable... very respectful submission today.
So thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much. Okay. I'll start.
Um,
thank you for the opportunity to make this oral submission to the,
um, Petitions Committee. The purpose of the Judicial Conduct
Commission and Judicial Conduct Panel Act is for a
robust investigation process, section
4A. Five pertinent sections are found in that act,
which make up the body of the commissioner's actions and decisions.
Withdrawal of complaints, no further action, section
15A, dismissed, section 16,
referred to head of bench, section 17,
section 8 (1) (c) and section
8B, and then recommendation for judicial conduct panel to
be established, section 18. In the
2024/'25 annual report, of the
403 complaints finalized, 104
had no further action taken, 277 dismissed
outright, seven referred to heads of benches, and four are
recommended for a judicial conduct panel to be
established. Thus, the majority of
complaints, 381 out of
403 complaints,
97.2%, were not even mentioned in the report,
other than a figure in the table. These are the
highest figures in the last six years of complaints being
disregarded and no information provided to justify this
occurring. Complaints for people other than
judges. The annual reports over the years do not say how many
complaints received by the commissioner were for people other
than judges. Those non-judicial complaints
do not fall under the jurisdiction of the act in
terms of section 16A... 1A. If clearly
identified, this may have hopefully reduced the
number of complaints reflected as being against judges
in the annual reports. Complaints where no further
action is taken, section 15A, in the current
2020... '24/'25 report, 104 complaints,
25.8% of all complaints fall into this category.
And the public have no idea if the discretion was
correct or not, as there is just
silence. Complaints which were
dismissed, section 16, in the current '24/'25
report, 277 complaints,
68.7% of all complaints fall under this
category. And no one questions why no fir- no
information is provided in the report, the most significant
section of complaints, and the report is
blank. It is this section where the commissioner's
interpretation of the word
jurisdiction in section 16 (1) (a)
contradicts section 16 (1) (b) . Sections
16 (1) (a) - (i) need to be
unpacked, showing how many complaints were dismissed in
terms of each subsection. Section 16
(1) says the commissioner must dismiss the complaint
if the commissioner is of the opinion that, A, the complaint is
not within the commissioner's jurisdiction.
A clear understanding of the term jurisdiction in the act can be
defined... Remember, it's can, mine, um, as
the jurisdiction of the Judicial Conduct Commissioner and Judicial
Conduct Panel Act 20- 2004
is all judges and justices within New Zealand and the
Chatham Islands. So that is my
definition, um, because there is no definition th- in the
act and that is a problem. Um, section 16
(1) (b) says that complaint has no bearing
on judicial functions or judicial
duties. This means all complaints with
bearing on judicial functions or judicial
duties are valid complaints. There is no
information in the report to indicate that section 16 (1) (b)
has been followed. It would appear that the commissioner has actually
been applying the direct opposite under section
16 (1) (a) . Another pertinent section
is, um, section 16 (1) (f) , which says the
commissioner must dismiss a complaint if the complaint is about a
judicial decision or other judicial function that
is or was subject to a right of appeal or
right to apply for judicial review.
The only way that these complaints can be dismissed is if there is a
right of appeal, meaning a person has further
legal channels to follow. Sadly, only the defendant,
and thus defense counsel and prosecutor, have a right to
appeal. A witness or victim in a criminal case does not
have a right to appeal. And thus, section 16 (1) (f) only
directly applies to the defendant, defense
counsel, and the prosecutor. Everyone else is subject to the
prosecutor agreeing to lodge an appeal.
And I'm very much aware of that because I sit in that situation.
A question needs to be asked-... would a prosecutor lodge
an appeal when it could bring into question the
prosecutor's own work in the case, or lack
thereof? Also, how can a person
appeal a judge's decision when the judge has broken
a law while performing his duties?
As no appeal action can unbreak a
law and the damage is done to the
person and cannot be undone. Complaints
which refer to heads of benches. This is my positive point.
I think the '24/'25 annual report gave clear
details of all seven complaints referred to
the relevant head of bench. This section is well-presented,
pointing out
the inappropriate conduct but these judges...
by these judges which require correction.
Complaints which recommend the attorney general to appoint a Judicial
Conduct Panel. In the '24/'25 annual report,
the table reflects that four complaints were referred to the attorney
general, but the report only mentions one referral.
This means that the attorney general, who's required to check this report,
has not done her judiciary duties and allowed the report to
go to the House of Representatives with this clear
error. Either the statistics are incorrect
or there were three other referrals to the attorney general which are not
mentioned in the report. The one complaint referred to
the attorney general has been in the newspapers.
Wha- what about the other three referrals, showing something is actually
going wrong here? Um, the weak argument used by the
Judicial Conduct Commissioner to justify how he does his
work. In the '24/'25 annual report, once again, the
commissioner interprets Section 16 (1) (a) by turning
to Section 8 (2) . But Section 8 (2)
talks about function and not jurisdiction.
The commiss- commissioner's jurisdiction is to deal with judges
only. The Judicial Conduct Panel is to
investigate. Section
26 (1) states the Judicial Conduct Panel has the same
powers as are conferred on commissions of inquiry by Sections
4 and 4 (b) to (8) of the Commissions of Inquiry Act
1908. Section 11, titled "Which
complaints must be dealt with," unpacks what the commissioner
must deal with, clearly showing his function and
jurisdiction. Section 11 (1)
states, "The commissioner must receive and deal with every complaint made
under this section about the conduct of a judge, regardless of whether the
subject matter of the complaint arises in the exercise of the
judge's judicial duties or otherwise." The
commissioner is required to e- even consider if
the action was a criminal offense, as stated in Section
11 (2) . An alternative route to resolve
issues. How can a country run a dual system, one in
terms of legislation and one informal to deal with complaints against
judges? If anyone else did this, it would be deemed
as vigilantism. The reason for this informal
system being required needs to be investigated as the legal
fraternity feel thwarted by the commissioner to deal
with their complaints addressed via the legal
route. What is currently happening, minor complaints are
being dismissed by the commissioner while similar complaints are being
dealt with by the Law Society to reach the heads of
benches and bypassing the commissioner and the
Act. It is either in or out. You
cannot ha- have it both ways. The wording of the
2024/'25 report shows that the commissioner realizes
that there are exceptions to his interpretation of Section
16 (1) (a) , (8) (ii)
and 16 (1) (f) ) , but he is still silent
on Section 16 (1) (b) ) . Thus, the commissioner has
admitted in writing to Parliament that he has been dismissing
complaints which could have been referred for further action
but declined to because of his interpretation of
jurisdiction. The only way to unravel what has been happening
within the work of the commission is to appoint an independent body to
review each decision of all Judicial Conduct Commissioners,
starting with the current reporting period and systematically working
back to the first report. Only then will the rep-
the public know and understand what is currently shrouded in mystery,
and judges will be held to account for their
actions. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Hall. Would you imagine
that complaints would go directly to this
new panel that you're proposing, um, or...
Yeah. ... or what would, what would be the, what would be the
threshold?
No, what I'm proposing is that we actually have a, a panel to
actually go and look to see if the
decisions where the... and especially Section, Section
16 (1) (a) ) , where the commissioner currently
is dismissing complaints
what, for what is actually said to be jurisdiction, but he's interpreting as
function. And we need to look at those decisions and
see if they were actually valid decisions.
And until we actually divide from what is
a complaint against a judge and what is a complaint against
a officer of the court, a prosecutor, whatever else, but an oth- a
non-judge person, then only... 'Cause that is the
valid reason why Section 16 (1) (a) ) is,
um, being asked. So, until we split those two, then we'll
have this body of people where currently the commissioner
is-... saying it's not my function to deal with it because it's actually going
into details of what a judge has actually made a decision.
But that's why I'm saying that Section 16 (1) (b) is not being
considered, because Section 1C (b) is, it's the opposite of
(b) which needs to be considered by the commissioner.
So once we've dealt with non-judge things, now we've got the ones which are
being dismissed because of jurisdiction, and
those are not jurisdiction. Those are the very things.
That's why I'm saying that the panel is the one which has got the powers and
needs to do the investigations, not the commissioner.
That the commissioner currently is dismissing complaints because he's
saying, "That was a decision made in a court, in a judgment, and I'm not
allowed to touch it." But clearly that isn't in
contradiction of Section 16 (1) (b) , which is actually saying
the opposite to that, um, because it's saying not a judicial
function or judicial duty. Um, so-
Um, uh, okay. Vanessa Wenning?
Um, thank you very much.
Oh, we're just, we are a little time constrained, Mr. Paul.
Yeah. Just, um, what's, what do you think the volume of the work that's
needed here would be? Just have
understanding.
Okay. We're talking about, like, for this financial year-
Yeah.
... ending, um, 31st of July was
277, which he, um, which were
dismissed, um, outright. They just need to be going
and recategorized. Ones which were for non-judges,
and then looking at those and saying, "Which ones could have actually been
considered?" 'Cause clearly the commissioner in this latest report is admitting
that he will, under certain discretion, actually allow things to go
through, but he's not allowing all to go through.
So my opinion is there might be... I mean, I have no clue
because I don't know how many were for non-judge people, and that actually is the
category. 'Cause now you're talking about 403, but that
403 actually might only be 300. And so
suddenly... So there might be 150, 200 applications which need to be
looked at, or 200 complaints looked at, and to say, "Were
they
jurisdiction?" No. And were they, yes, they are jurisdiction.
We've got to then recategorize them and look under the other categories,
including Section 16 (1) (f) , which is, could the person
appeal?
I see.
But that means more complaints will go through to the heads
of benches for them to address, and there might be a couple of
hundred going through every year, going through to the heads of
benches, and not just like the seven.
Sadly, the Law Society does not keep records.
They destroy their records soon as they've actually gone to the heads of benches.
So one's not actually able to understand how many complaints are going from
the legal fraternity through the Law Society to,
um, heads of benches. But clearly there must be quite a few.
And
I'm not taking any- All right. So, look, no, so, Mr. ... Sorry, Mr.
Paul, we, we do have limited time.
Yeah,
sorry. You're making very long answers. Um, we've got time for one more
question. Sorry. We've, uh, this is why I do encourage, um,
submitters to
w- we, we have read the submission, but,
Actually, Mr. Chair, I think he's answered my question.
All right. Uh, you have, uh... Okay.
Well, just give a chance then, just to give us a quick summary, um,
and then I'll, uh, we will, um, the, the, the, uh,
panel will now retire to consider.
So just, anything just sum up your
position, perhaps you'd like to...
Okay. I feel that
removing non-judges, suddenly w- the country will say there's not actually so many
bad judges. I think if things go through the heads of benches,
um, complainants will be much happier that something has actually
happened, and maybe we
will see judges actually being,
um, more circumspect in what actually they say and
don't, um, shall we say, lose their rag or, or say
things, and that they might actually apply the law much more
clearly. Um, thank you.
All right. Look, well, thank you. Um, very, very full, um,
submission. So, uh, what we'll do now is that, uh, obviously we,
uh, um, are receiving some, um,
submissions from other organizations who are
involved in the, in the, um, in, in the process.
So, and then we'll report back to Parliament on that. So thank you very much.
Uh, much appreciated.
Thank you.
Much ap- Thank you very much.